
Report from Referee 2 on
AOAS2002-013, "Mardov-switching state space models for uncovering
musical interpretation,"
Daniel J MacDonald, Michael McBride, Yupeng Gu, Christopher Raphael


I think this is a very nice paper. It is very interesting and thorough. 
The authors also make a strong case as to why statistical modeling is
needed here, as opposed to machine learning, which I really liked.

The only point with which I strongly disagree is their characterization 
of the tempo variability within a state, given on p9, first paragraph:

    The observed ratio of musical time to clock time is therefore 
    best viewed as stochastic, the sum of an intentional, constant 
    tempo, plus noise representing inaccuracy or, perhaps more 
    charitably, unintentional variation which the listener fails 
    to perceive as "wrong". 

While there is certainly some variation that can be attributed to error, 
I strongly disagree that, even in a state of "constant tempo", the 
variability is chiefly attributed to such error. Rather, in my opinion,
there is a great deal of intentional artistic expression in those micro 
variations (i.e. not the 4 states they capture in their paper, but 
within a state of constant tempo). To me, Rubenstein is intentionally 
creating that variability in the recording that they highlight, and 
that is part of the character of his interpretation. That professional 
musicians can often repeat the same variation patterns in different 
parts of the piece but not others (and in a way that "makes sense" 
structurally) suggests that they do have control over that variability. 
Watching good professional musicians play Steve Reich's phase music in 
live concert, which requires incredibly steadiness of tempo from the 
performers, should also suggest that much of the micro variability 
that, for instance, Rubenstein employs is surely under his control.

However, this doesn't change their paper at all as their method is 
not designed to model this variation, but rather to smooth it! So 
whichever interpretation one goes with, the results of their analysis 
are exactly the same. The disagreement here is a musical one, not a 
statistical one.  But, is there a statistical way to settle this?

