AOAS2002-013, "Markov-switching state space models for uncovering
musical interpretation,"
Daniel J MacDonald, Michael McBride, Yupeng Gu, Christopher Raphael

Dear Daniel:

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to The Annals of 
Applied Statistics. Three highly knowledgeable referees and
I have read it carefully; constructive reports from Referees
1 (R1R1.pdf) and 2 (R1E2.txt), and brief reports from 
Referee 2 (R1E3.txt) and myself (R1E1.txt), are available via 
the links below. Three of us agree that your manuscript is
well written, nicely organized, and offers a potentially
useful approach to musical compositions. We enjoyed reading
it and believe it matches well the mission of AOAS.

All four reports raise important issues which need to be 
addressed before we can proceed with further review at this time.
The main issues are:

1. Model for tempo:

Referee 1 raises a really interesting point: should changes in
tempo be viewed as additive or multiplicative? Referee 1 makes
a good case for considering an additive model for log(tempo).
Referee 2 makes a similar comment about your approach to "tempo".

2. Sensitivity to priors:

I agree wholeheartedly with point #2 from Referee 1: how sensitive
are your results to your priors, especially in view of your "rather 
strong {\it a priori} assumptions" (p5, l.7), "reasonably strong 
prior information for many of the parameters" (p13, l.-3), and
"reasonably strong information about the probabilities of transitioning 
between states" (p14, l.2-3)? These "strong" statements almost scream
for some sensitivity analysis - or else, *very* solid evidence that
changing them would be non-sensical from a musical perspective.

3. Clustering:

I also have to agree with Referee 1 (#3) about the clustering.
It is absolutely a great idea. But I think much more can be done.
See also my report for another (possibly naive) idea.

4. Objective:

The most critical report, by far, comes from Referee 3, whose
musical collaborator believes you are addressing the wrong problem:

"He/she mentioned it would be much more interesting to attempt 
to decide what variations in interpretation and performances 
are more compelling to the listener (among other possibilities). 
Indeed, to me the authors do not demonstrate the utility of their
approach in this application - the paper is mostly descriptive."

First, I am quite sure that Referee 3 did not know (as I do)
that you and your co-authors are musicians yourselves. Second,
I am not sure that your model *cannot* "decide what variations 
in interpretation and performances are more compelling to the
listener." But I do believe that you *can* "demonstrate [or, at
least describe] the utility of [your] approach" for this purpose.

5. Exposition:

Referee 1 and I identified several errors in exposition, some
of which are important. Please proofread carefully.


These and other issues are identified in the enclosed reports. 
I believe that most of the comments are intended to be constructive, 
and I hope you will find them useful in that regard. 

In my opinion, a revision that fully addresses them would lead 
to an improved manuscript that will be very favorably received. 
While some of the issues are straightforward, others will require 
serious attention, and, at this point, I cannot guarantee the
outcome. However, based on my own reading and the enthusiasm 
from Referees 1 and 2, I am optimistic that, with sincere effort, 
all issues can be addressed satisfactorily. If you would like 
to undertake a revision, please follow the links below, and be 
sure to include point-by-point responses to each of the comments 
in the reviews (as a single, additional Supplementary File).
Please be advised, I can make no guarantees about acceptance at 
this time. I believe that you can successfully address the issues, 
but much depends on how well you respond to them, particularly 
points 1-3 above. Almost surely I will ask Referee 1 to review
the revision.

Thank you for submitting your manuscript to AOAS. I hope the 
enclosed reports will be useful to you in your work and look forward 
to seeing a revision. Thank you again for your interest in AOAS.

Sincere regards,

Karen Kafadar
Editor-in-Chief, Annals of Applied Statistics